---
layout: post
title:  Getting started with open repositories - Part 2
subtitle: What you need to know
gh-repo: ekaroune/the-open-archaeobotanist
cover-img: asset/img/open-repos.jpg
thumbnail-img: asset/img/open-repos.jpg
share-img: asset/img/open-repos.jpg
tags: [open science, open research, archaeology, open data, open repositories]
---

# Getting started with open repositories - Part 2 - What you need to know

Remember!! - In part 1, I made it very clear that you can **deposit your open archaeological data for free** and here is more information about open repositories that will get you started doing that.

## What is an open repository?

An open repository or [open-access repository](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-access_repository) is an online platform that provides free, immediate and permanent archiving of research outputs. They are not just for data and pre-prints as they can be used to deposit all sorts of outputs such as code, educational materials and presentation slides and videos. This means that anyone can use, download and distribute their content on these platforms. 

I want to put a slight caveat on this last point as these repositories allow you to add a license to your outputs and this determines how open each output is and therefore how they can be modified and reused by others. This gives you greater control over your outputs. 

Some repositories allow you to embargo outputs to be released at certain times and there are also repositories that have the option to keep some outputs completely private. So they are not necessarily for open outputs but are generally used in this manner.  

There are open repositories that you pay to deposit data and then those that are free (usually those run by large research institutions). They both essentially do the same thing, which is to provide long-term archiving of research outputs and give free open access to anyone who wants to use this data. 

There are different types of repositories:  
General ones that cater for any research output from any discipline, for example [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/), [Open Science Framework](https://osf.io/) and [figshare](https://figshare.com/). 
Domain-specific repositories, such as Archaeological data service or tDAR.
Output-specific repositories, such as pre-print repositories. Examples are [EarthArXiv](https://eartharxiv.org/) and [bioRxiv](https://www.biorxiv.org/).
Institutional repositories used by members of a particular institution. 

The quantity of repositories is sometimes rather overwhelming if you are not used to using them and also how to use them can be confusing. 

Hopefully by reading the rest of this blog you will feel more confident to start to use them for your own research outputs. 

## What are the benefits of using open repositories?

The benefits are on a number of levels: for you as a researcher, your own discipline, the wider scientific community and also the general public.

They make your research outputs accessible worldwide to potentially anyone that wants to read and reuse them.
The increased accessibility maximises the visibility and impact of your research and consequently the research of your institution.
It makes your work more sustainable by archiving it for long-term storage.
It makes all your outputs citable by providing a persistent identifier such as a digital object identifier (DOI). 
It can provide a workspace for your project and enable collaborative projects to work more effectively.
The use of research outputs are measured using usage statistics such as number of  views and downloads.
They provide versioning to track the history of research outputs.
They can facilitate the development and sharing of resources for teaching.
They can aid the dissemination of grey literature such as dissertation theses. 

The main benefit of using a free open repository, apart from the fact that it is free!, is that you have much more control over when and how you deposit your outputs. The use of the repository can be throughout your project rather than waiting until a certain moment, usually towards the end, to deposit the final outputs. This suits projects that are working with an open research approach and so want to make all their outputs available when they are created. You can even work in free open repositories that can openly share work in progress.  

They also enable you to work more flexibly in collaborative projects especially if you are working in a distributed team with a number of different institutions. The use of version control to track outputs makes the work of the project more transparent and therefore helps to establish reproducible workflows.

## How do you choose an open repository?

As I have already mentioned, not all open repositories are free. 

There is the option to pay for an open repository for all your data depositing needs with the Archaeological Data Service (UK based) and Open Context and tDAR (US based). These repositories serve a particular purpose as they take away some of the extra work involved in data management and deposition. They can also provide you with an expert to help you. This is ok if you have planned for it in your research budget and many commercial organisations use this option. 

However, these services are obviously exclusionary to those that cannot afford it but I also have concerns with using commercial organisations in terms of the longevity of storage. Choosing a repository based at a well established research institution seems a better option in this regard. These research institutions, such as CERN (the European Organization for Nuclear Research) that established the Zenodo repository, have committed to providing free open repositories for the life of the institution. 

So for certain researchers, using a free open repository is a better option because they are more inclusive and flexible for any project, an individual researcher, and it really is not that hard to do it yourself. 

### Key considerations when choosing a free open repository

Does it provide a persistent identifier for my outputs? 
You want a separate DOI for each output so that they can be individually cited. 
Is there a choice of licenses and does it allow the license I want? 
Some repositories require you to use CC0 for data, which is a completely open license and this is a good choice for data. But other research outputs, especially documentation and software, tend to need other licenses such as CC-BY. See [Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/) for more information about different licenses. 
Does it have enough space for your research items?
Not really a consideration as the space you get is usually large or unlimited but it is worth checking.
What other features are available on the repository?
Do you need outputs to be embargoed or private?
Do you want all your outputs in one place? Including pre-prints, data, code, etc.
Do you want to link to other tools such as Google Drive or Github. This makes it easier to deposit outputs in some of the repositories.

For archaeological projects, you can choose one of these general free open repositories that are open for use by researchers from any discipline for any research output.
